Recommender System (RS) for research articles is a very important
application that helps researchers keeping track of their eld of
study. Moreover, it can aid the scientists (e.g., physicians) as a
decision support tool. One way by which researchers nd articles is
following citations in other articles that they are interested in, but
this limits them to specic citation communities, and it is biased
towards heavily cited papers. Another method of nding articles is
keyword-based search, which is a powerful approach, but it is also
limited as it can be dicult to form queries to search with. This has
opened the door to using recommendation methods as a way to
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for prot or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specic permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UMAP’17, July 9–12, 2017, Bratislava, Slovakia
© 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-4635-1/17/07...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3079628.3079708
help researchers nding interesting articles. Most of the current RSs
are available for commercial applications, such as news, movies and
music applications. On the contrary, few projects address scientic
literature recommendation.
The existing RSs approaches can be classied into three types:
content-based ltering, collaborative ltering and hybrid approaches.
Content-based ltering uses the content of items which are highly
rated by a user in order to nd her preferences [17]. On the other
hand, collaborative ltering utilizes the similarity between user’s
preferences and other similar users’ preferences in order to recommend new items [7]. Hybrid RSs use a combination of contentbased and collaborative ltering techniques [5]. Most of the current
research paper recommendation systems are based on the bag-ofwords model, that represents the number of times each word occurs
in a document. The context of the words and the semantic similarity between words are not considered during the extraction and
representation of the document features.
Recent advances in articial neural networks (ANNs) have shown
that continuous word vectors can be learned as a probability distribution over the words of a document. Deep learning architectures
are basically ANNs of multiple non-linear layers. A key benet of
deep learning is the analysis and learning of massive amounts of
unsupervised data, making it a valuable tool for big data analytics
where raw data is largely unstructured. Using deep learning techniques to extract meaningful data representations makes it possible
to obtain a semantic and relational understanding of the data from
such high-dimensional textual data.
We intend to use deep learning techniques for recommending
relevant research papers in PubMed1 database, based on the semantic content of the papers that match user’s preferences. User
proles will be built based on some basic information that a user
may provide, such as the papers she is interested in, to be selected as
input from a graphical user interface. Moreover, the proles will be
improved using user interaction information that can be extracted
from users’ logs.
The rst part of this paper briey presents the research goals,
some of the research literature related to the existing approaches
of designing research paper RSs. The other parts introduce the
proposed system architecture, the technologies that we will use,
and the evaluation methods. The paper is concluded by presenting
the current research progress.
1https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
UMAP 2017 Doctoral Consortium
UMAP’17, July 9-12, 2017, Bratislava, Slovakia
327
2 RESEARCH GOALS
This main research goals can be summarized as follows:
• To propose a novel personalized research paper recommendation approach that learns and utilizes the semantic
representation of papers’ titles and abstracts for matching
users’ interests.
• To study the eect of using deep neural networks, in particular word2vec2 and long short-term memory (LSTM)
techniques in extracting the semantic representation of the
scientic papers’ titles and abstracts for the recommendation task.
• To propose a comprehensive user modeling framework that
combines user explicit and implicit feedback by allowing
users to specify their preferred papers and by analyzing
users behaviors.
3 RELATED WORK
There have been some attempts to develop recommendation systems for scientic literature. Citation databases such as CiteSeerX3
apply citation analysis in order to identify papers that are similar to
an input paper. Scholarly search engines such as Google Scholar4 focus on classic text mining and citation counts. The research of [20]
has also presented a recommendation system based on citations.
Other work was done based on articles content; many dierent types of continuous representations techniques such as Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [19] and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
[1, 9] have been used to describe the content of a document as a
probability distribution of latent variables known as topics. The
assumption behind those methods is that words that are related to
each other will often appear in the same documents. The system
illustrated in [1] used TF-IDF and LSA methods to discover groups
of words that are equivalent in their meaning.
The authors of [19] presented a topic-based recommendation
system that combines traditional collaborative ltering with topic
modeling based on LDA model. Nascimento et al. [16] provided
another example of a content-based RS for scientic articles recommendation. Their proposed solution utilized the n-grams models
to generate queries from a particular article that is presented by
the user, and then submit the generated queries on publicly available web sources of scientic papers. Their method used the titles
and abstracts of the articles, and the similarity of the papers was
calculated through the cosine similarity method.
In [21], the authors presented PURE, a content-based recommendation system that works on documents’ titles and abstracts
of the PubMed dataset. It automatically captures user preferences
by using her response to the presented papers. Furthermore, PURE
uses the well-known TF-IDF method and learns probabilistic model
for computing relevant documents based on selected documents
added by the user.
Docear [3] is an academic literature suite to search, organize,
and create research articles. Its recommender system uses contentbased methods to recommend articles. It builds a user model using
the mind maps created by the user, and match it with Docear Digital
2https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
3http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/index
4https://scholar.google.it/
Library. The authors claimed to have achieved good results based
on the number of clicks gained, through around thirty thousand
tested recommendation results.
Some authors suggested using collaborative ltering and ratings
[6]. Ratings can be generated by considering citations as ratings.
They can also be implicitly inferred by monitoring user’s actions
such as downloading or bookmarking a paper. The system proposed in [6], called Scienstein, combines dierent methods for providing literature recommendation. Scienstein integrated the traditional keyword-based search with citation analysis, author analysis,
source analysis, implicit and explicit ratings. Instead of entering
just keywords for searching documents, a user may provide entire
documents as an input, include reference lists, and provides implicit and explicit ratings in order to improve the recommendation
process.
In [10] a personalized academic research paper RS is presented.
It recommends articles relevant to the research eld of the users,
supposing that researchers like their own articles. Based on this
assumption papers similar to the ones previously written by users
are recommended as relevant to them. This system uses a web
crawler to retrieve research papers from IEEE Xplore5 and ACM
digital library6. It measures text similarity using bag-of-words and
KNN methods to determine the similarity between two research
papers and uses collaborative ltering methods to recommend the
items.
Finally, the research of [14] proposed a novel method for integrating structural and contextual information to build a context specic
network for generating recommendations for similar PubMed articles.
Some of the used methods have drawbacks, which limit their ability to deliver recommendations. For example, in the citation-based
approaches, not all research papers are cited and hence cannot be
recommended. Also, reference lists can contain irrelevant citations
just because the author believes that well-known papers should be
cited, or in order to promote other publications although they are
irrelevant for the citing paper [6]. In addition, text-based RSs cannot
identify related papers if dierent terms are used. Moreover, the
basic topic modeling methods which are based on the traditional
bag-of-words techniques, have the disadvantage that topics are
probability distributions over a collection of words that represent
a document, it does not consider the semantic relations between
words. Thus, it may result in redundant topics that contain dierent
words, but with the same meaning. In addition, these techniques
don’t take the context of the words into consideration.
Collaborative ltering in the research paper recommender systems domain would be ineective as there is a huge number of
papers compared with the number of users, and only few users
rated the same papers. In domains such as movie recommendations,
there are few items and many users such as in MovieLens7 recommender system, and most movies have been watched and rated by
at least some users [2]. Therefore, like-minded users can be found
and recommendations can be given eectively.
The use of deep neural networks for Natural Language Processing (NLP) has recently received much attention; it provides high
5http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/home.jsp
6http://dl.acm.org/
7https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/
UMAP 2017 Doctoral Consortium
UMAP’17, July 9-12, 2017, Bratislava, Slovakia
328
quality semantic word representations. These models are usually
trained on large amounts of data. In the last few years, deep neural
network models have been applied to tasks ranging from machine
translation to question answering, but not much attention is paid to
the RSs area. For instance, in [15] and [12], the authors showed that
LSTM can be used to build a language model and assess semantic
similarity between sentences. To the best of our knowledge, there
have been no work done before for recommending scientic articles
based on LSTM.
4 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
4.1 Data Collection
PubMed is one of the largest public databases in biological and
medical sciences. It contains more than 26 million citations for
biomedical literature from MEDLINE8, life science journals, and
online books. Each paper in MEDLINE is indexed using a controlled
vocabulary, called Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), which is used
to describe the main topics discussed. The set of MeSH terms is
manually assigned by biomedical experts who scan each article.
We will use BioPython [4] library to crawl the PubMed database
through PubMed Central (PMC) APIs9, and download titles and
abstracts of sample papers. Then, we will concatenate the title and
abstract for each paper.
We will use only the titles and abstracts of the papers to calculate
the similarity between the papers and recommend similar articles
since they will be always publicly available. In addition, fetching
and analyzing the full text of every paper would signicantly slow
down the process.
4.2 Language Modeling
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are deep models that are widely
used when dealing with sequential data, unlike the traditional neural networks which assume that all inputs and outputs are independent of each other. RNNs have shown great promise in image
and video captioning, time series prediction, NLP, text and music
generation and much more tasks [11]. LSTM networks are a type of
RNNs [8], that allows the model to learn longer-term dependencies
than a traditional RNN.
Word2vec is one of state-of-the-art word embedding techniques,
published by Google in 2013 [13], that learns distributed representations for words. It converts text into a numerical form that deep
nets can understand. The idea of the word vectors is to represent
a word by a dense vector in a semantic space, and other vectors
close by should be semantically similar. Other deep recurrent neural
network architectures had been previously proposed for learning
word representations, but the major problem with those methods
was the long time required to train the models. Word2vec learns
quickly compared to other models. In general, parallelization is
used to speed up the training process, so that larger models can be
trained in a reasonable amount of time.
We will create a language model using the word2vec and LSTM
techniques, in order to be used for measuring the relatedness of
the scientic publications. Word2vec will be used for computing
individual word representation for all the words from the collected
8https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/pmresources.html
9https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/home/develop/api.shtml
papers. We intend to use gensim Python package [18] for this purpose. Then, we will train a LSTM model using the vectors of words
resulted from the word2vec step, in order to learn the semantic
content of the research papers. This model will be used for the
purpose of document embedding. In other words, the LSTM model
will be utilized for representing an article according to the semantic
representation of its words.
4.3 User Prole Creation
In order to recommend papers to users, we will model users’ interests in user proles. These proles will represent users’ tastes and
opinions about papers. Such proles could contain both long-term
and short-term interests, gathered explicitly or implicitly.
One of the explicit feedback forms is to ask the user to explicitly
specify papers which are relevant to her (which are satisfying information need). Implicit feedback is to collect data about user’s
preferences based on observations of the user’s behavior from the
transactions log like viewing abstracts or full-text articles.
In our study, we will build user proles from users’ explicit and
implicit short-term interests; user can explicitly add or delete the
preferred articles as an input to the recommender system, from
which the title and abstract will be extracted and the semantic
vectors will be calculated. In addition, we will infer users’ interests
based on viewing abstracts and clicking links to full-text articles
while querying the PubMed Central in the same query session.
We will assign high weights to the vectors that characterize the
topics which the user is interested in, based on the user’s actions;
for instance, viewing abstract only should be weighted lower than
viewing the whole paper.
4.4 Recommendation of papers
Using the constructed user prole and the feature vectors of the set
of the candidate papers to recommend, the system will compute the
cosine similarities between the papers in the user prole and the
ones in the corpus, considering the weights that take into account
the user feedback. Highly relevant papers will be ranked rst for
presentation. Therefore, the correctness of an item in the ranking
list should be weighted by its position in the ranking. Figure 1
shows the high level architecture of the proposed method.
4.5 Evaluation Methods
We will compare the results from our recommendation engine with
PubMed MeSH-based baseline. Similar to the PubMed recommender
system proposed in [14], we will use MeSH-based paper similarities
as the gold standard to evaluate the dierent methods. In the MeSHbased paper similarities, the quality of predictions for each paper is
dened based on its distance compared to similar predictions from
MeSH scores.
In addition to the described oine evaluation, we intend to conduct user studies in order to evaluate our proposed method. The
participants will be asked to read and indicate how the recommended papers are relevant to their research.
5 CURRENT PROGRESS
The thesis is now in the initial phase. We are currently studying the
dierent recommendation methodologies, deep learning techniques,
UMAP 2017 Doctoral Consortium
UMAP’17, July 9-12, 2017, Bratislava, Slovakia
329
Figure 1: The proposed method
and reviewing the literature of the research paper recommender
systems. The next steps will be the implementation of the proposed
approach and the evaluation of its performance in comparison with
other approaches in the literature